api-tests/TEST_EXECUTION_ORDER.md, before:

# Test Execution Order and Dependencies

This document describes the correct execution order for Bruno API tests and the dependencies between test files.

## Overview

The JavaVacunas API test collection now uses **dynamic test data** with no hardcoded entity IDs. Tests capture and reuse IDs through environment variables, making them portable across different environments and database instances.

## Environment Variables

### Authentication Tokens (Set by auth tests)
- `doctorToken` - JWT token for DOCTOR role
- `nurseToken` - JWT token for NURSE role
- `parentToken` - JWT token for PARENT role

### Dynamic Test IDs (Set by create tests)
- `testVaccineId` - First vaccine ID from database (captured by `get-all-vaccines`)
- `testChildId` - Child ID created by `create-child`
- `testAppointmentId` - Appointment ID created by `create-appointment`
- `testVaccinationId` - Vaccination record ID created by `create-vaccination-record`
- `testInventoryId` - Inventory ID created by `add-inventory`

### Dynamic Test Data (Set by pre-request scripts)
- `dynamicDocNumber` - Timestamp-based document number (prevents duplicates)
- `dynamicBatchNumber` - Timestamp-based batch number (prevents duplicates)
- `appointmentDateTime` - Future date for appointments (30 days from now)

## Required Execution Order

### 1. Authentication (MUST run first)
```bash
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
```

**Files (in any order):**
- `login-doctor.bru` → Sets `doctorToken`
- `login-nurse.bru` → Sets `nurseToken`
- `login-parent.bru` → Sets `parentToken`
- `register-new-nurse.bru` (optional)
- `register-new-parent.bru` (optional)

**Why first:** All other tests require valid JWT tokens.

---

### 2. Vaccines (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local
```

**Critical file (MUST run first in this folder):**
- `get-all-vaccines.bru` → Sets `testVaccineId` (first vaccine from database)

**Other files (order not critical):**
- `get-vaccine-by-id.bru` (uses `testVaccineId`)
- `get-vaccine-by-name.bru`
- `search-vaccines-by-disease.bru`
- `get-active-vaccines.bru`

**Why second:** Many tests need `testVaccineId` for vaccinations and inventory.

---

### 3. Children (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/children --env local
```

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-child.bru` → Sets `testChildId` (MUST run first)
2. `get-child-by-id.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
3. `update-child.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
4. `get-all-children.bru`
5. `search-children.bru`
6. `create-child-by-nurse.bru` (independent)
7. `create-child-forbidden-parent.bru` (independent)
8. `update-child-forbidden-nurse.bru` (independent)
9. `delete-child.bru` (uses `testChildId`, MUST run last - deletes the test child)

**Why third:** Appointments and vaccinations require a child to exist.

---

### 4. Appointments (Run after auth + children)
```bash
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local
```

**Dependencies:** Requires `testChildId` from children tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-appointment.bru` → Sets `testAppointmentId` (uses `testChildId`)
2. `get-child-appointments.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
3. `confirm-appointment.bru` (uses `testAppointmentId` - state transition SCHEDULED→CONFIRMED)
4. `complete-appointment.bru` (uses `testAppointmentId` - state transition CONFIRMED→COMPLETED)
5. Other appointment tests (order not critical)

**State Machine:** SCHEDULED → CONFIRMED → COMPLETED/CANCELLED

**Note:** Cannot cancel after completing. Cannot complete without confirming first.

---

### 5. Vaccinations (Run after auth + children + vaccines)
```bash
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local
```

**Dependencies:**
- Requires `testChildId` from children tests
- Requires `testVaccineId` from vaccine tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-vaccination-record.bru` → Sets `testVaccinationId` (uses `testChildId`, `testVaccineId`)
2. `get-vaccination-by-id.bru` (uses `testVaccinationId`)
3. `get-child-vaccination-history.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
4. `get-vaccinations-by-vaccine.bru` (uses `testVaccineId`)
5. `create-vaccination-forbidden-parent.bru` (uses `testChildId`, `testVaccineId` - expects 403)

---

### 6. Inventory (Run after auth + vaccines)
```bash
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local
```

**Dependencies:** Requires `testVaccineId` from vaccine tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `add-inventory.bru` → Sets `testInventoryId` (uses `testVaccineId`)
2. `update-inventory-quantity.bru` (uses `testInventoryId`)
3. `get-inventory.bru`
4. `get-low-stock.bru`
5. Other inventory tests

---

### 7. Schedules (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local
```

**No dependencies** - can run anytime after auth

**Files (order not critical):**
- `get-paraguay-schedule.bru`
- `get-schedule-by-country.bru`
- Other schedule tests

---

### 8. Users (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/users --env local
```

**No dependencies** - can run anytime after auth

**Files (order not critical):**
- `get-all-users.bru`
- `get-user-by-id.bru`
- Other user tests

---

## Complete Test Run (Recommended Order)

```bash
# 1. Start backend
docker compose --env-file .env.docker up -d

# 2. Run tests in order
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local
bru run api-tests/children --env local
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local
bru run api-tests/users --env local
```

## Run All Tests at Once

```bash
# Run entire collection (requires proper execution order)
bru run api-tests --env local
```

**Note:** Bruno CLI respects the `seq` field in test files, so tests should run in the correct order within each folder.

## GUI Mode (Bruno Desktop)

In Bruno Desktop GUI, tests work perfectly because:
- Environment variables persist across folders
- You can run tests in any order
- Token state is maintained in the GUI environment

**Recommended workflow:**
1. Open collection: File → Open Collection → Select `api-tests/`
2. Select environment: `local` or `docker`
3. Run `auth/` folder first to set tokens
4. Run other folders in any order

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: Tests fail with 401 Unauthorized
**Solution:** Run auth tests first to set JWT tokens
```bash
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
```

### Problem: Tests fail with 404 Not Found (child/vaccine not found)
**Solution:** Run dependency tests first
```bash
# For child-related tests:
bru run api-tests/children/create-child.bru --env local

# For vaccine-related tests:
bru run api-tests/vaccines/get-all-vaccines.bru --env local
```

### Problem: Tests fail with 409 Conflict (duplicate document number)
**Solution:** This should no longer happen - `create-child` now uses dynamic timestamps. If it persists, check that:
- The test file has `script:pre-request` block
- The document number uses `{{dynamicDocNumber}}`

### Problem: Appointment date is in the past
**Solution:** This should no longer happen - `create-appointment` now uses dynamic future dates. The test calculates a date 30 days from now.

### Problem: Environment variables not persisting between folders (CLI mode)
**Solution:** This is a known Bruno CLI limitation. Workarounds:
- Run folders individually in order (recommended)
- Use Bruno GUI for integrated testing
- Set tokens manually in environment files

## Changes from Previous Version

### What was fixed:

1. **Hardcoded Child IDs removed** (8 files)
   - Now use `{{testChildId}}` from `create-child.bru`

2. **Hardcoded Vaccine IDs removed** (3 files)
   - Now use `{{testVaccineId}}` from `get-all-vaccines.bru`

3. **Document Number made dynamic**
   - Uses timestamp to prevent duplicates
   - Pattern: Last 7 digits of `Date.now()`

4. **Appointment Date made dynamic**
   - Calculates future date (30 days from now)
   - Prevents test failures when hardcoded date passes

5. **Batch Number made dynamic**
   - Uses timestamp to prevent duplicates
   - Pattern: "BATCH-" + last 8 digits of `Date.now()`

### Benefits:

- **Portable:** Tests work on any machine/database
- **No seed data required:** Tests create their own test data
- **No conflicts:** Dynamic values prevent duplicate errors
- **Repeatable:** Can run tests multiple times without cleanup
- **Isolated:** Each test run creates fresh test data

## Test Data Lifecycle

```
1. Login (auth tests) → Get JWT tokens
2. Get vaccines (vaccine tests) → Capture testVaccineId
3. Create child (children tests) → Capture testChildId (dynamic doc number)
4. Create appointment (appointment tests) → Capture testAppointmentId (uses testChildId)
5. Create vaccination (vaccination tests) → Capture testVaccinationId (uses testChildId + testVaccineId)
6. Create inventory (inventory tests) → Capture testInventoryId (uses testVaccineId, dynamic batch)
7. Read/Update operations use captured IDs
8. Delete operations clean up test data (optional)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Always run auth tests first** in a new test session
2. **Run get-all-vaccines early** to capture testVaccineId
3. **Run create-child before appointment/vaccination tests** to capture testChildId
4. **Follow state machine transitions** for appointments (SCHEDULED→CONFIRMED→COMPLETED)
5. **Don't run delete tests** until you're done with dependent tests
6. **Use Bruno GUI** for interactive testing and debugging
7. **Use Bruno CLI** for automated testing in CI/CD pipelines

## CI/CD Integration

For automated testing in CI/CD:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e

# Start services
docker compose --env-file .env.docker up -d

# Wait for backend to be ready
sleep 10

# Run tests in order (exit on first failure)
bru run api-tests/auth --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/children --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/users --env local || exit 1

echo "All tests passed!"
```

Save as `api-tests/run-all-tests.sh` and make executable:
```bash
chmod +x api-tests/run-all-tests.sh
```

Commit message:

Clarify GUI execution order in documentation
Add explicit GUI workflow instructions and fix misleading
statement about running tests in any order. Even in GUI mode,
tests must respect dependency order.

Changes:
- Update README Quick Start with separate GUI/CLI sections
- Clarify GUI Mode section in TEST_EXECUTION_ORDER.md
- Add step-by-step GUI workflow instructions
- Emphasize that TEST_EXECUTION_ORDER.md is the primary reference

api-tests/TEST_EXECUTION_ORDER.md, after:

# Test Execution Order and Dependencies

This document describes the correct execution order for Bruno API tests and the dependencies between test files.

## Overview

The JavaVacunas API test collection now uses **dynamic test data** with no hardcoded entity IDs. Tests capture and reuse IDs through environment variables, making them portable across different environments and database instances.

## Environment Variables

### Authentication Tokens (Set by auth tests)
- `doctorToken` - JWT token for DOCTOR role
- `nurseToken` - JWT token for NURSE role
- `parentToken` - JWT token for PARENT role

### Dynamic Test IDs (Set by create tests)
- `testVaccineId` - First vaccine ID from database (captured by `get-all-vaccines`)
- `testChildId` - Child ID created by `create-child`
- `testAppointmentId` - Appointment ID created by `create-appointment`
- `testVaccinationId` - Vaccination record ID created by `create-vaccination-record`
- `testInventoryId` - Inventory ID created by `add-inventory`

### Dynamic Test Data (Set by pre-request scripts)
- `dynamicDocNumber` - Timestamp-based document number (prevents duplicates)
- `dynamicBatchNumber` - Timestamp-based batch number (prevents duplicates)
- `appointmentDateTime` - Future date for appointments (30 days from now)

## Required Execution Order

### 1. Authentication (MUST run first)
```bash
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
```

**Files (in any order):**
- `login-doctor.bru` → Sets `doctorToken`
- `login-nurse.bru` → Sets `nurseToken`
- `login-parent.bru` → Sets `parentToken`
- `register-new-nurse.bru` (optional)
- `register-new-parent.bru` (optional)

**Why first:** All other tests require valid JWT tokens.

---

### 2. Vaccines (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local
```

**Critical file (MUST run first in this folder):**
- `get-all-vaccines.bru` → Sets `testVaccineId` (first vaccine from database)

**Other files (order not critical):**
- `get-vaccine-by-id.bru` (uses `testVaccineId`)
- `get-vaccine-by-name.bru`
- `search-vaccines-by-disease.bru`
- `get-active-vaccines.bru`

**Why second:** Many tests need `testVaccineId` for vaccinations and inventory.

---

### 3. Children (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/children --env local
```

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-child.bru` → Sets `testChildId` (MUST run first)
2. `get-child-by-id.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
3. `update-child.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
4. `get-all-children.bru`
5. `search-children.bru`
6. `create-child-by-nurse.bru` (independent)
7. `create-child-forbidden-parent.bru` (independent)
8. `update-child-forbidden-nurse.bru` (independent)
9. `delete-child.bru` (uses `testChildId`, MUST run last - deletes the test child)

**Why third:** Appointments and vaccinations require a child to exist.

---

### 4. Appointments (Run after auth + children)
```bash
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local
```

**Dependencies:** Requires `testChildId` from children tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-appointment.bru` → Sets `testAppointmentId` (uses `testChildId`)
2. `get-child-appointments.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
3. `confirm-appointment.bru` (uses `testAppointmentId` - state transition SCHEDULED→CONFIRMED)
4. `complete-appointment.bru` (uses `testAppointmentId` - state transition CONFIRMED→COMPLETED)
5. Other appointment tests (order not critical)

**State Machine:** SCHEDULED → CONFIRMED → COMPLETED/CANCELLED

**Note:** Cannot cancel after completing. Cannot complete without confirming first.

---

### 5. Vaccinations (Run after auth + children + vaccines)
```bash
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local
```

**Dependencies:**
- Requires `testChildId` from children tests
- Requires `testVaccineId` from vaccine tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `create-vaccination-record.bru` → Sets `testVaccinationId` (uses `testChildId`, `testVaccineId`)
2. `get-vaccination-by-id.bru` (uses `testVaccinationId`)
3. `get-child-vaccination-history.bru` (uses `testChildId`)
4. `get-vaccinations-by-vaccine.bru` (uses `testVaccineId`)
5. `create-vaccination-forbidden-parent.bru` (uses `testChildId`, `testVaccineId` - expects 403)

---

### 6. Inventory (Run after auth + vaccines)
```bash
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local
```

**Dependencies:** Requires `testVaccineId` from vaccine tests

**Recommended order:**
1. `add-inventory.bru` → Sets `testInventoryId` (uses `testVaccineId`)
2. `update-inventory-quantity.bru` (uses `testInventoryId`)
3. `get-inventory.bru`
4. `get-low-stock.bru`
5. Other inventory tests

---

### 7. Schedules (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local
```

**No dependencies** - can run anytime after auth

**Files (order not critical):**
- `get-paraguay-schedule.bru`
- `get-schedule-by-country.bru`
- Other schedule tests

---

### 8. Users (Run after auth)
```bash
bru run api-tests/users --env local
```

**No dependencies** - can run anytime after auth

**Files (order not critical):**
- `get-all-users.bru`
- `get-user-by-id.bru`
- Other user tests

---

## Complete Test Run (Recommended Order)

```bash
# 1. Start backend
docker compose --env-file .env.docker up -d

# 2. Run tests in order
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local
bru run api-tests/children --env local
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local
bru run api-tests/users --env local
```

## Run All Tests at Once

```bash
# Run entire collection (requires proper execution order)
bru run api-tests --env local
```

**Note:** Bruno CLI respects the `seq` field in test files, so tests should run in the correct order within each folder.

## GUI Mode (Bruno Desktop)

In Bruno Desktop GUI, tests work reliably because:
- Environment variables persist across folders (unlike CLI mode)
- Token state is maintained throughout the session
- You can see test results immediately with syntax highlighting
- Pre-request and post-response scripts execute properly

**Recommended workflow:**

1. **Open collection:** File → Open Collection → Select `api-tests/`

2. **Select environment:** Choose `local` or `docker`

3. **Run tests in dependency order:**
   - **FIRST:** Run entire `auth/` folder (or manually run the 3 login tests)
     - This sets `doctorToken`, `nurseToken`, `parentToken`
   - **SECOND:** Run `vaccines/get-all-vaccines.bru`
     - This captures `testVaccineId` from your database
   - **THIRD:** Run `children/create-child.bru`
     - This creates a test child and captures `testChildId`
   - **THEN:** Run other tests/folders as needed

4. **For complete workflow testing:**
   - Run folders in this order: auth → vaccines → children → appointments → vaccinations → inventory → schedules → users
   - Or use "Run Folder" on each folder sequentially

**GUI Advantages over CLI:**
- ✅ Environment variables persist between folders
- ✅ Visual feedback with formatted responses
- ✅ Easy to re-run individual failed tests
- ✅ Can inspect request/response details
- ✅ No token persistence issues

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: Tests fail with 401 Unauthorized
**Solution:** Run auth tests first to set JWT tokens
```bash
bru run api-tests/auth --env local
```

### Problem: Tests fail with 404 Not Found (child/vaccine not found)
**Solution:** Run dependency tests first
```bash
# For child-related tests:
bru run api-tests/children/create-child.bru --env local

# For vaccine-related tests:
bru run api-tests/vaccines/get-all-vaccines.bru --env local
```

### Problem: Tests fail with 409 Conflict (duplicate document number)
**Solution:** This should no longer happen - `create-child` now uses dynamic timestamps. If it persists, check that:
- The test file has `script:pre-request` block
- The document number uses `{{dynamicDocNumber}}`

### Problem: Appointment date is in the past
**Solution:** This should no longer happen - `create-appointment` now uses dynamic future dates. The test calculates a date 30 days from now.

### Problem: Environment variables not persisting between folders (CLI mode)
**Solution:** This is a known Bruno CLI limitation. Workarounds:
- Run folders individually in order (recommended)
- Use Bruno GUI for integrated testing
- Set tokens manually in environment files

## Changes from Previous Version

### What was fixed:

1. **Hardcoded Child IDs removed** (8 files)
   - Now use `{{testChildId}}` from `create-child.bru`

2. **Hardcoded Vaccine IDs removed** (3 files)
   - Now use `{{testVaccineId}}` from `get-all-vaccines.bru`

3. **Document Number made dynamic**
   - Uses timestamp to prevent duplicates
   - Pattern: Last 7 digits of `Date.now()`

4. **Appointment Date made dynamic**
   - Calculates future date (30 days from now)
   - Prevents test failures when hardcoded date passes

5. **Batch Number made dynamic**
   - Uses timestamp to prevent duplicates
   - Pattern: "BATCH-" + last 8 digits of `Date.now()`

### Benefits:

- **Portable:** Tests work on any machine/database
- **No seed data required:** Tests create their own test data
- **No conflicts:** Dynamic values prevent duplicate errors
- **Repeatable:** Can run tests multiple times without cleanup
- **Isolated:** Each test run creates fresh test data

## Test Data Lifecycle

```
1. Login (auth tests) → Get JWT tokens
2. Get vaccines (vaccine tests) → Capture testVaccineId
3. Create child (children tests) → Capture testChildId (dynamic doc number)
4. Create appointment (appointment tests) → Capture testAppointmentId (uses testChildId)
5. Create vaccination (vaccination tests) → Capture testVaccinationId (uses testChildId + testVaccineId)
6. Create inventory (inventory tests) → Capture testInventoryId (uses testVaccineId, dynamic batch)
7. Read/Update operations use captured IDs
8. Delete operations clean up test data (optional)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Always run auth tests first** in a new test session
2. **Run get-all-vaccines early** to capture testVaccineId
3. **Run create-child before appointment/vaccination tests** to capture testChildId
4. **Follow state machine transitions** for appointments (SCHEDULED→CONFIRMED→COMPLETED)
5. **Don't run delete tests** until you're done with dependent tests
6. **Use Bruno GUI** for interactive testing and debugging
7. **Use Bruno CLI** for automated testing in CI/CD pipelines

## CI/CD Integration

For automated testing in CI/CD:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e

# Start services
docker compose --env-file .env.docker up -d

# Wait for backend to be ready
sleep 10

# Run tests in order (exit on first failure)
bru run api-tests/auth --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/vaccines --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/children --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/appointments --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/vaccinations --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/inventory --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/schedules --env local || exit 1
bru run api-tests/users --env local || exit 1

echo "All tests passed!"
```

Save as `api-tests/run-all-tests.sh` and make executable:
```bash
chmod +x api-tests/run-all-tests.sh
```
